title: Disclaimers
date: 2016-05-16 18:10

Disclaimer time! Unless otherwise stated:

I am currently employed, and currently plan to stay employed for the foreseeable
future. Regardless of what company employs me at any given time, the views
expressed on this site are my own, and do not reflect the views of anyone else,
nor any company, nor my employer.

I use artwork on my website. The use of artwork or logos which belong to a
company does not imply any official relationship between me and that company,
nor does it imply that the company endorses me or my work. For full information
about the artwork I use on my site, and any trademarks involved, please see the
[artwork details][artwork-details] page.

This website currently does not support comments. Sorry? If I ever add support
for comments, I'll add a disclaimer about the content of those comments.

Although I may occasionally recommend or suggest things, no content in this
website is to be considered an official or professional advice in any capacity.
If you follow instructions found on this website, I am not responsible for what
happens. Likewise, I do not provide any guarantee or warranty for any of the
content in this site, nor any content linked to in other sites. If you try any
of my code and your computer stops working, it's not my fault. If your computer
gets up and eats your cat, I may feel sorry for your cat, but it will still not
be my fault. The code samples I provide here and provide links to are not to be
considered complete implementations of anything, and should not be directly used
in any system of any importance.

I also take no responsibility for the content provided at any site that I link
to. If I provide a link to another website, and that website happens to show you
inappropriate content, that's the other site's problem, not mine. Besides,
shouldn't you be using an ad-blocker?

Finally, to the best of my ability, the content in this site is accurate and
valid at the time of its writing. I take no responsibility for any inaccuracies
or mistakes. If any of my content is incorrect in any way, you may contact me to
let me know (or just open a pull-request on GitHub). When informed, I may, at my
own discretion, update the content to correct any inaccuracies or mistakes.

[artwork-details]: /artwork-details/
